
SUBSTITUTE TEACHER
JOB DESCRIPTION

JOB TITLE: 
Substitute Teacher 

STATUS:
Non-Exempt

REPORTS TO: 
Principal/HR 
AESOP Administrator

TERMS:
As needed

DEPARTMENT: 
Assigned Campus

PAY GRADE: 
Per substitute pay scale

PRIMARY PURPOSE:
In the absence of the teacher, provide students with appropriate learning activities and experiences designed to help them fulfill their potential for intellectual, emotional, physical, and social growth. Enable students to develop competencies and skills to function successfully in society.

QUALIFICATIONS:

Education:
Minimum of 60 or more hours from an accredited university

Special Knowledge/Skills:
Knowledge of subjects assigned
General knowledge of curriculum and instruction
Ability to instruct students and manage their behavior
Strong organizational, communication, and interpersonal skills

MAJOR RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES
1. Assume all responsibilities and duties assigned to the classroom teacher.
2. Implement lesson plans provided by the classroom teacher that fulfill the requirements of district’s curriculum program.
3. Implement classroom teacher designed lesson plans that reflect accommodations for differences in student learning styles, use appropriate instructional strategies and materials.
4. By following teacher lesson plans, present subject matter according to guidelines established by Texas Education Agency, board policies, and administrative regulations.
5. Work cooperatively with special education teachers to modify curriculum as needed for special education students according to guidelines established in Individual Education Plans (IEP).
6. Plan and supervise assignments of teacher aides(s) when necessary.
7. Be a positive role model for students and support mission of school district.
8. Create classroom environment conducive to learning and appropriate for the physical, social and emotional development of students.
9. Manage student behavior in accordance with Student Code of Conduct and abide by substitute/employee handbook.
10. Take all necessary and reasonable precautions to protect students, equipment, materials, and facilities.
11. Establish and maintain open communication and professional relationship with parents, students, principals, and teachers.
12. Use effective communication skills to present information accurately and clearly.
13. Keep informed of and comply with state, district, and school regulations and policies for classroom teachers.
14. Compile, maintain, and file all reports, records, and other documents required (examples may include but not limited to grading papers, completing attendance procedures, and filling out substitute teacher report).
15. Attend and participate in faculty meetings when serving as a long term substitute.
16. Record and turn in money to the office that was collected during the day.
17. Report all student injuries, accidents, and illnesses to appropriate authority immediately.
18. Report all suspected abuse to CPS/police and the principal.
19. Maintain confidentiality regarding students and staff personnel information.
20. Perform other duties as may be assigned.

WORKING CONDITIONS:
Mental Demands:
Maintain emotional control under stress.

Physical Demands/Environmental Factors:
Frequent walking, standing, stooping, bending, pulling and pushing; move small stacks of textbooks, media equipment, desks, and other classroom equipment; occasional lifting of 45 lbs or more. The employee is regularly required to speak, hear and use hands to manipulate, file or sort objects. Specific vision abilities required by this job include close vision, distance, peripheral vision, depth perception and ability to adjust focus. 

WORK ENVIRONMENT: 
While performing the duties of this job, the employee occasionally works in outdoor weather conditions, such as cold, hot, humid and wet conditions. The foregoing statements describe the general purpose and responsibilities assigned to this job and are not an exclusive  list of all responsibilities, duties, and skills that may be required.

